The concept behind this second project was to familiarize ourselves with what bash, shell, and scripting is within git bash. The first step was to simply type the commands: "date", "cal", "pwd", and "ls". All of these commands worked properly except for "cal" which give me an error stating "bash: cal: command not found". The next step was to practice scripting by creating a new file in vi but our instructions stated that we needed to use nano instead. When I used nano, I noticed it was more user friendly than vi was and listed helpful commands towards the bottom. I typed the same commands in the first part inside of nano and then saved my file within my "Documents" folder. After this, I used chmod +x to make my file executable and then ran it with "./". I noted that the only program that did not run was the "cal" command so I did not see a calendar on my screen. I used nano to go back into the newly created task.sh file and added "#!/bin/bash" which allows the script's interpreter to be defined as Bash. The next section in this tutorial we had to use the command file to see the identity of the "hello world" file. It was a shell script, ASCII text executable file. I used the copy command after to send the standard output of the file "hello world" to a new named "0_vyz". A quick check of the command "file" proves that contents were successfully copied from file "hello world". I used nano to go inside the file and delete the line at the header "#!/bin/bash". After saving and quitting, I used file to see the new identity and it was changed to just ASCII text. The next step in the tutorial was to see an alternate way to use execute a script and that was used by simply saying "bash filename". This way is a lot cleaner and there is no need to use a text editor. The last part in the tutorial was learning the difference between an absolute path and a relative path. Knowing the difference between the two is crucial when changing directories and when sending content to other files. Simply put, if you are within the directory of the file which you are executing a command for then you are in a relative path and do not have to explicitly state the path with "/etc..". However, if you are in a separate directory, you have to state the path explicitly with multiple slashes "/" so that whatever action you perform can be properly executed. A really good command that can be used here is "pwd" or print working directory which tells you which directory you are currently in.

After playing along with the tutorial on linuxconfig.org as mentioned in the above paragraph, I started with my first script that I named "hello-world.sh". The first step was to create the file, the instructions don't say to use "touch" which is what I am used to using to create a new file. Instead, the instructions say to use "vi". As a side note, I did not use "nano" as stated in the PDF instructions because I have never used it and was confusing myself because I am already used to using "vi" and "vim". So, from now on, every action in a text editor I used was with "vi" and not "nano". I created the new file using vi and then wrote the shebang along with echo "Hello World". Echo is a command used to display a string of text. After writing this in the newly created "hello-world.sh" file I hit the ESC button and used "wq" to save and quit my work in vi. I used "chmod +x" to change the access file permissions and subsequently wrote "./" and then the file nam to execute the newly created script. The end output was "Hello World" and everything ran correctly. 

The next script I created was "backup.sh". I had difficulty with this script creation. The very beginning you have to use command "tar -czf" to create a compressed tall bar of the entire user home directory. I understood the process of what was happening but for my tar command to work I needed to change the directory from what the example had to what my home directory was. However, I had difficulty making this work and what ended up working for me was using the path "/c/morej/Documents". After I specified this path, I was able to use the "tar" command and then use the "rm" command to remove the "tmp" directory. The instructions then called for a use of the "which" command with bash to print a full path to the newly created "backup.sh" file. To finalize this script, I used "echo" followed by the tar command and then appended it to the backup.sh file with ">>". Then I used vi to check if the content had been added to the backup.sh file and it did. I adjusted the shebang within the backup.sh file to include the "#" and then used the same "chmod +x" and "./" commands to make the file executable. The end output I received was the following line "tar: Removing leading /' from member names". I wasn't sure if that was the correct output or not but based on the videos, I want to say that it was, and it was working correctly. 

The next script that I created was "welcome.sh" this was simple enough. All I did was create a new file using vi and within the text file add commands that would print out the user and what version of the bash shell there were running. This was done using two echo commands and having three variables named "greeting", "user", and "day". The end output after executing was the following: "Welcome back morej! Today is Saturday, which is the best day of the entire week! Your Bash shell version is "4.4.23(1)-release. Enjoy!". This script was running correctly.

In between writing the next script, I practiced using variables by assigning values and then using echo with simple arithmetic to print out those values in one line. Practicing this led to a change I had to make in the "backup.sh" file. I rewrote was in that file and replaced it with parameters which are noted with the curly brackets. After replacing the text within this file, I received an error with executing that stated "tar: /home/morej: Cannot Stat: No such file or directory". I was not able to fix this problem after searching online and the instructions were not help because in the example, they are using their own personal home directory. The updated "backup.sh" was not working as intended and was incorrect. 

The next part was not a script creation but rather a creation of a file named "foobar". I used "touch" to create the new file. The idea here was to note the difference between standard output and error when sending content to files. I also created a new file named when redirecting standard output from "foobar" to a new text file named "stdout.txt" and did the same action to make another filed named "stderr.txt". I used a greater than symbol ">" to achieve this. I then mimicked the same action only I used a greater than symbol and ampersand ">&" and redirected the standard error to a new file named "stdoutandstderr.txt". 

Another update to the "backup.sh" file was next and the change within the file was having a redirection of stderr. I executed the new changes received the same error as before and "backup.sh" was not work as intended and was incorrect once again. 

The next script I created was "function.sh". I used vi to create the file and within it grouped multiple command in a single command named "user_details". Then, came an update to "backup.sh: where I had to make use of command "echo" to make the code easier to read. There were two functions named "total_files" and "total_directories". I typed everything correctly and went it came down to executing the program using "./backup.sh". The file did not execute properly and was not running correctly. I saw the text within the updated file but I still received that error that stated it couldn't find my home directory. 

Up next was just practice using numeric and string comparisons. I assigned a value to two variables and then using the commands: "-lt", "-gt", "-eq", "-ne", "-le", and "-ge" saw the changes in the results of the values of the variables when using these commands. This led to the created of a new script called "comparison.sh" which just compares to variables and then prints the result right after. I used vi to create this filed and then after making the file executable using chmod I executed it and my output matched the example which was "Are UNIX and GNU strings equal? 1 Is 100 equal to 100 ? 0". This script was working correctly and was a success. 

The next script was using if else statements. I made the name of the script "ifelse.sh" and used vi to create it. Within the file I typed an if else statement that compares two variables with fixed values. This was achieved with "-lt" and two echo statements. I executed the script and had the result: "800 is greater than 200!". This matched the example so this script was running well and was working correctly. 

Another update to "backup.sh" to include a conditional if/then/else statement and the same error was resulted. This script was working incorrectly. So far, the script backup is the only the script that has been giving me trouble executing. 

The next script I made was "param.sh". This was an easy script that practiced on using positional parameters via command line arguments like "$1" and "$#". This program when executed is intended to print out the output in the three separate lines that were created in the file "param.sh". The output I received matched the example of "1 2 4 4 1 2 3 4" and "hello bash world 4 hello bash scripting world". This script was running correctly and received no errors. 

Yet another update to "backup.sh" and still the same error was haunting me. I tried changing the directory at the top where the shebang was and that did not work. I was starting to think that maybe I saved this script in the wrong area. I still made the necessary changes to the file and continued with making the new scripts. 

The next step was using loops. I practiced using "for" loops first, and then created a file named "items.txt". Within this file I wrote the words "bash", "scripting", and "tutorial". I saved the newly created text file and used the "cat" command to print out the content of the file. This was working correctly because the output when executed was what I had just typed in the file. I then used a for loop with the "cat items.txt" command and I received the same numbers from the video which were "4, 9, 8". This for loop was intended to count the characters of each line for a given file. The next loop I worked on was the "while" loop. I made a script using vi named "while.sh" and typed a working while loop within the file. I executed the file to check if the while loop was working and I receieved the answer "1 2 3" and when I made the second change to the file by changing the value of the variable in the while loop, I received the output of "3" which matched the video meaning this script was working correctly. The last loop I worked on was the "until" loop. I made a file named "until.sh" and then made an until loop within the file and everything was working properly when I executed the file. I received the same answer as the video. The process was identical to the while loop script creation which is why I spoke very briefly about the until loop script creation.

The final update to "backup.sh" was implementing the ability to backup all directories supplied to the script on a command line. There was a new function added called "backup" and a new for loop was added to accommodate this function that allows each users directory to be supplied as an argument. When I went for the final execution, nothing happened this time. I used the command "./backup.sh" and nothing happened it just went to the next line. In the end, I was not able to get my "backup.sh" script working properly and this was frustrating because I could not find a permanent working solution.

Shared link to my Project 2 with Lasette Gonzales via email at 8:19 PM.
and shared link to my Project 2 with Jakob Zavala via email at 8:20 PM.
